Hello, hello hello, and welcome to English Learning for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to fascinating stories, and learn weird and
wonderful things about the world at the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are going to be talking about a man called Frederic Tudor.
He was a visionary, in the true sense of the word, and he
single-handedly invented the global ice transportation market.
It’s a fascinating story, of a man who most certainly deserves the nickname of “The Ice King”.
OK then, Frederic Tudor, The Ice King.
There is an expression in English that someone could “sell ice to the eskimos”.
It means that someone is a smooth and persuasive talker, that they could get
anyone to do anything they wanted, even if it is against their best interests.
Eskimos of course have little need for ice.
People who live in the Arctic Circle are surrounded by more than enough ice if they want it,
and I imagine that the last thing anyone in sub-zero temperatures wants is an ice cold drink.
It would evidently be much easier to sell ice to someone living in a warm climate, someone who
would love a refreshing ice-cold drink, or who would benefit from ice’s refrigerative powers.
And in the days before industrial freezers, this was even more so.
People living in warm climates, especially those that weren’t anywhere near
mountain ranges that might have snow or ice on them, well they had no access to ice.
And further north, or also further south I should add, large parts of the world were covered in
ice, or at least there were rivers and lakes that froze over every year, forming huge masses of ice.
The only problem was getting this ice from where it occurred naturally to where it did not.
It would take a brave person, a visionary some might even say, to look at this
challenge and say “this is what I am going to dedicate my life to solving”.
This person’s name was Fredric Tudor.
You may remember him from episode number 350, when we talked about the Unusual Names of Cocktails.
He was born in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1783, and by his death, in 1864 he would have pioneered
the transport and sale of ice all over the world, earning himself the nickname of “the Ice King”.
He was born to a wealthy family, and grew up partially in Boston and
partially in a large estate outside the city, where the family would
spend the summers to escape the city heat, and get some fresh air.
As such, he had experienced firsthand the benefits of having ice.
Boston is in the north east of the United States, a region
that gets very cold in winter and enjoys warm summers.
In the grounds of the family’s countryside residence, there
was a large pond that always froze over in the winter.
Ice would be cut from the pond, and stored in an ice house,
which was a sort of specially designed insulated shed.
If the chunks of ice were large enough, and they were cut into holes in the ground and covered up,
the ice would barely melt, allowing the family to use ice in the summer months when it was warmer.
This wasn’t altogether unusual, and there were plenty of
“ice houses” all over the northeastern part of the country.
Ice would be harvested during the colder months and stored in these large warehouses,
then sold off to businesses and individuals when the temperature rose in the summer.
Fredric Tudor saw this and thought, well, I can see why someone in
Boston or New York buys ice in August, the summer months are warm and
ice is both refreshing in drinks and a useful way of preserving food.
But how about in the south of the country, or the Caribbean, or even India?
These are areas that don’t have access to any form of ice, and they need it 365 days a year.
He had experienced this firsthand when travelling to Cuba.
It was scorching hot, and the young man would have paid
any amount of money for some ice to add to his drink.
In the summer of 1805, when he was 21, he bought a diary which he
called his “Ice House Diary”, and in it he started to hatch his plan.
In the book, he detailed his thoughts and feelings about a business
opportunity that he felt was guaranteed to make him spectacularly wealthy.
He didn’t go shouting from the rooftops about it,
though, out of fear that someone else would copy it.
He confided in his older brother, William, and the two set out to work on the problem of
how to transport ice from the rivers and lakes of New England to the south of the country.
Now, I should probably add that there is some debate about
whether the idea was Fredric’s or whether it was his brother’s.
This is a secret that will be consigned to the history books, but whichever of
the pair came up with the idea, clearly it was Fredric that was its main driver.
First was the problem of how to take this from a fledgling business idea to reality.
As anyone who's ever started a business will know,
business is really a question of supply and demand.
The supply is the thing that you have to sell, the demand is the people who want to buy it.
The Tudor brothers had both, or at least they thought they did.
Supply was the ice, and that was available in huge
quantities, for free, in the rivers and lakes around them.
There was new ice every year, a seemingly inexhaustible supply, the only
cost was extracting it, removing the chunks from the rivers and lakes.
And the demand was the people sweltering away in the south of the country.
The brothers didn’t think they needed to do any kind of sophisticated market research,
they had been to the area, they knew it was hot and people didn’t have ice, they knew
that people would want their drinks to be cooler and their food better preserved.
They didn’t need to sell ice to the eskimos, they needed to sell ice to the Louisianans and
the Cubans, it would be business “on easy mode”, at least from the point of convincing someone
in a hot climate that their life would be made more comfortable with the addition of ice.
They had the supply and they knew where to find the demand, but we’re missing something.
Getting the supply to the demand.
To state the obvious, ice takes up a lot of space and it melts.
Nobody thought it was possible, nobody was even trying.
But Fredric was young and full of enthusiasm.
He had heard stories about ice being transported from Norway to London, and even from
Paris to Trinidad, it must be possible, he thought, he just needed to figure out how.
His plan was to go to the areas that he wanted to sell the ice too,
establish an agreement with the local authorities that would grant
him a monopoly on the ice trade, and then repeat this over and over.
Now at least when he got started, there was no ice trade, so requesting a monopoly wasn’t
particularly difficult, his main problem was convincing people that he would actually
be able to transport ice from Massachusetts thousands of kilometres further south.
His first target was the French island of Martinique, in the Caribbean.
He sent his brother and his cousin there in late 1805, to present
their case to the governor, who granted the sought-after monopoly.
Back in Boston, after word had started to get out about the plan, the Tudors found themself
the object of ridicule, with merchants in Boston society thinking the plan stupid and foolish.
This didn’t deter Fredric Tudor, but it didn’t make his life any easier.
People thought it simply wouldn’t work, and he found it very hard
to find any ship owner willing to risk carrying his icy cargo.
And I do use the word “risk” intentionally.
Ice was heavy, it would melt on the way, most probably damaging whatever other
goods were being carried on the boat, and when the melted water went into the
sea, the boat would be considerably lighter and this would make it less stable.
Carrying ice was risky for the other goods on a boat, and risky for the boat itself.
In the end, Tudor had to buy his own boat, at huge expense.
What’s more, he had not really figured out how to stop the ice melting.
At this time, there were some ideas about how temperature
worked, but how to keep stuff cold was still a bit of a mystery.
Ice houses tended to have thick walls, and the ice was typically packed tight
and into the ground, but there wasn’t much more known about it than that.
Tudor didn’t have any great ideas, he didn’t have a scientific background or
anything like that, but he figured he would try his best, and learn as he went along.
And back in Boston, he ran into another problem that he hadn’t anticipated.
It had been a particularly cold winter, which was good in terms of ensuring that there was more
than enough ice to harvest, but the weather was so bad that the ship couldn’t leave on time.
Eventually, on the 13th of February, 1806, the ship departed Boston
harbour, packed to the brim with ice, 130 tonnes of the stuff.
It arrived 3 weeks later in Martinique, without major loss, but it is
here that we realise that the Tudors hadn’t done all of their homework.
As there was no ice industry in Martinique, nobody there had any idea what to do with it.
There were no ice houses, no way of storing it.
The ice had to remain on the boat, with curious passers by coming to the boat to
inspect it and buy it directly, only to hurry home with the ice wrapped in cloth.
Fredric Tudor had hoped to sell $10,000 of the stuff,
which is something like $250,000 in today’s money.
In his first two days, he sold a grand total of $50, and the ice was melting before his eyes.
He returned to Boston in late April, having made a significant loss on the trip.
He knew that he would face the wrath of the Boston business community, with scores of people
telling him that he was foolish, and muttering “I told you so”, but it seems that Fredric
Tudor was incredibly stubborn, or too proud to give up, or possessing remarkable foresight.
Or all three.
He had seen that it was possible to transport ice to the Caribbean, and people
seemed interested in it when it arrived, now it was a question of making sure that
there were adequate storage facilities for his merchandise when it arrived there.
They hadn’t bought it, Tudor thought, because they didn’t know how to store it.
He tried to secure a monopoly on the ice trade with Cuba, but it wasn’t granted.
Nevertheless, he built an ice house in Havana, and
proceeded to deliver ice to the island the following year.
It was a moderate success, but far from the home run that he had hoped for.
What’s more, his up-until-then buoyant family finances were taking a hit.
In other words, his father was running out of money, and there wasn’t
much left to support this seemingly foolhardy entrepreneurial venture.
And Tudor still hadn’t properly figured out the best way to stop the ice melting.
He took it upon himself to do some crude experiments, and came to the conclusion
that peat, the soil-like substance, was particularly good at insulating the ice.
If he could properly insulate the ice on the ship, and also
when it got to its destination, he would have cracked it.
The insulation on the ship was important not only to stop his precious ice melting, it was also
important because he needed to convince ship owners that melting ice wouldn’t damage their ship.
If he could convince ship owners to transport his cargo, he would also be doing them a favour.
See, Boston was an import, rather than an export port.
Ships arrived packed to the brim with goods, which were unloaded and then sold.
And the ships then left…empty.
This was a problem for the ship owners, not just because they weren’t making any money on
the outward journey, but because the ships were very light, and would capsize more easily.
As such, many ship owners would even fill up their ships with stones and rocks, to make
them heavier, only to throw them overboard when they got to their final destination.
So, if Tudor could find a way to properly insulate the ice, he would be
able to pay the ship owners a very low rate to transport it, because he
would be saving them money as they wouldn’t need the stones any more.
It was the money-making opportunity of a lifetime.
The ice was free, he just needed to pay people to cut it out from the lakes.
The transport would be practically free, or at least
very cheap, as he would be saving the ship owners money.
And when it got to its final destination, there was no price a sweltering
merchant in Havana or Charleston, or later even Mumbai, no price
they wouldn’t pay for some refreshing New England ice in their drink.
As I’m sure anyone who has started their own business will know firsthand,
the process was full of obstacles, false starts and near misses.
Fredric was arrested for non-payment of a business debt, his family almost went bankrupt, there
were unexpected bribes to be paid to local officials, shipwrecks, trade embargoes and more.
The entire operation didn’t turn a profit until 1810, and even then
it was a profit of a mere $1,000, around $25,000 in today’s money.
But from then, things soon started to go in a more positive direction.
Now, his career as “The Ice King” lasted almost 50 years, too long for me to give an
accurate chronological account, but his success came down to technological advances, a
cut-throat approach to competition and an understanding of the importance of monopoly.
On a technological level, he was fighting nature.
He couldn’t stop the ice melting, but he could do
his utmost to get it to melt as slowly as possible.
To do this he would constantly tinker and experiment with new designs for
ice houses, making them more and more efficient with every passing year.
And if you are wondering what the key to a successful ice house was, it
involved a combination of insulation and ventilation, and making sure
that the melted water was taken away from the ice as quickly as possible.
As sales grew, he also ran into a problem he hadn’t anticipated, and a nice problem to have.
He was running out of ice.
When rivers or ponds freeze, they freeze from the top downwards, and even in the
freezing winters of New England, only the top half a metre or so would become ice.
No matter how cold it got, the ice would be not much more than
50 centimetres thick, so the water below would remain liquid.
A clever trick that Tudor figured out was that if he drilled into the ice until he hit the
water below, the water would rise up through the hole, the ice would sink, and the water on
top would freeze, thereby increasing the amount of ice that he could extract from each pond.
In terms of the competition, his better understanding of insulation, as well as
faster ships meant that his ice would melt less quickly than his competitors’,
so he could charge a lower price, in the knowledge that selling their ice at the
same price would be unsustainable for all but the hardiest of his competitors.
And on the monopoly question, he managed to acquire monopolies in everywhere from Martinque to the
British West Indies to a destination that would prove to be the jewel in his ice crown, Calcutta.
Now, he first sent ice to Calcutta in 1833, and he estimated that
in the 20 years that it was in operation, that single route made
him $200,000, which is something like $7.5 million in today’s money.
As you might expect, his success meant that the market became increasingly crowded and competitive.
After all, ice was freely available in all of the ponds and rivers of New England, and
Tudor’s technological advancements at the Ice Houses were visible for everyone to see.
He had used technology to his advantage, but, perhaps ironically, it would
be a technological development that would cause Tudor’s entire business
to evaporate, but that wouldn’t be until well after his death, in 1864.
Artificial ice plants, which were essentially huge freezers that created ice out
of water, started to become more widespread in the second half of the 19th century,
but they were initially very expensive, and it was cheaper to transport natural ice.
But with time, this changed, and moving into the 20th century the market for ice, or
“frozen water” as it was called by those in the industry, was starting to melt away.
Today, not much remains, with barely an ice house or ship from this time still standing.
What most certainly does remain is the legacy of Fredric Tudor,
a man who undoubtedly deserves the title of “The Ice King”.
OK then, that is it for today's episode on Fredric Tudor, The Ice King.
I hope it's been an interesting one, and that you've learnt something new.
You've been listening to English Learning for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and I'll catch you in the next episode.